fifo_dev_dsl/dia/README.md, before:

# DIA Module

**DIA** (DSL for Interactive Agents) is a domain-specific language and runtime for translating
user intents and queries into tool invocations and context-aware logic. It powers goal-driven
agents that can resolve missing information, recover from runtime errors, and complete complex tasks
through interactive dialogue.

The DSL is composed of five categories of nodes:

- **Intent execution**: represents structured tool calls with named parameters. Includes success and error wrappers to support recovery.
- **Slot resolution**: handles missing values through user interaction or LLM-powered queries (`ASK`, `QueryFill`, `QueryGather`, `QueryUser`).
- **Control flow**: enables aborting, redirecting, or replacing execution paths (`Abort`, `AbortWithNewDsl`).
- **Value representation**: supports concrete values (`Value`), fuzzy values (`FuzzyValue`), return values from nested intents (`ReturnValue`), and references to previous slot values (`SameAsPreviousIntent`).
- **Containers**: used to group and propagate DSL elements, including `Slot`, `ListElement`, and `PropagateSlots`.

Each node is implemented as a Python class under [`dsl/elements`](dsl/elements), with detailed 
documentation available in [`dsl/elements/README.md`](dsl/elements/README.md).

This document provides a high-level overview of the `dia` package, including how DSL trees are generated,
parsed, resolved, evaluated, and integrated into interactive agent workflows.

## 📚 Table of Contents

- 🔁 [High-Level Flow Example](#-high-level-flow-example)
- 🧾 [Parsing DSL](#-parsing-dsl)
- 🧭 [Resolver](#-resolver)
- 🧮 [Evaluator](#-evaluator)
- 🧰 [Runtime Context](#-runtime-context)
- 🤖 [LLM Invocation Strategy](#-llm-invocation-strategy)
- 🚀 [End‑to‑End Execution](#-endtoend-execution)
- ✅ [License](#-license)

---

## 🔁 High-Level Flow Example

In the rest of the documentation, we will use the following example to illustrate DIA's ability to parse, resolve, and execute high-level intents.

Suppose a user says:  
_"Retrieve 3 screws from the inventory"_

DIA processes this in four stages:

1. **Transform user input into DIA DSL**  
   Converts the user's request into:  
   `retrieve_screw(count=3, length=ASK("What screw length do you need?"))`  
   This step uses the definitions of callable tools and the declared presence of runtime sources (such as a screw inventory) to generate the DSL expression and determine how to resolve missing information. At this stage, the model is only aware of the existence and purpose of each source, not their contents.

2. **Parse DSL syntax into DSL tree**  
   Parses the DSL string into a structured tree of DSL nodes.

3. **Resolve missing information**  
   Detects the unresolved `length` slot, prompts the user for clarification, and receives the reply `"12"`.

4. **Evaluate resolved DSL tree**  
   The tree is now complete:  
   `retrieve_screw(count=3, length=12)`  
   The system then executes the tool implementation for `retrieve_screw`, performing the real-world action.

---

## 🧾 Parsing DSL

The DIA parser converts a DSL expression, either handcrafted or generated by an LLM, into a tree of
`DslBase` nodes. This tree serves as the structured representation of the user's intent and is
processed by the resolver and evaluator in later stages.

The tree can be parsed using:

```python
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.dsl.parser import parse_dsl

root = parse_dsl('retrieve_screw(count=3, length=ASK("What screw length do you need?"))')

root.pretty_print_dsl()
```

In LLM-driven workflows, the DSL string is typically produced by an intent sequencer model (such as a fine-tuned LoRA adapter), which translates natural language prompts into structured expressions ready for parsing.

---

## 🧭 Resolver

The resolver performs a **stack-based traversal** of the DSL tree. It pauses when required values are missing and resumes after each interaction, enabling stepwise, multi-turn reasoning.

It walks the structure and resolves missing values using several mechanisms:

- `ASK` prompts the user for clarification.
- `QUERY_FILL`, `QUERY_USER`, and `QUERY_GATHER` query external sources via the `LLMRuntimeContext`.
- `PROPAGATE_SLOT` forwards values provided in the last interaction.
- `ABORT` and `ABORT_WITH_NEW_INTENTS` can replace parts of the tree.

Resolution is resumable. After each interaction request, the call stack is stored in the `ResolutionContext`, allowing resolution to continue once the user has responded.

This design is **asynchronous-friendly**: the resolver does not block or wait for input inside its internal loop. Instead, it exits cleanly after emitting an interaction request, allowing external systems (e.g., UI or message handlers) to collect input and resume resolution later.

```python
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.resolution.resolver import Resolver
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.resolution.enums import ResolutionResult
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.resolution.interaction import Interaction, InteractionAnswer
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.runtime.context import LLMRuntimeContext

runtime = LLMRuntimeContext(tools=[...], query_sources=[...])
resolver = Resolver(runtime_context=runtime, prompt="retrieve 3 screws from the inventory")

outcome = resolver(interaction_reply=None)
if outcome.result is ResolutionResult.INTERACTION_REQUESTED:
    print(outcome.interaction.message)  
    # Output: "What length do you need?"
    
    # Pass the user answer back into the resolver
    interaction = Interaction(outcome.interaction, InteractionAnswer("12"))
    outcome = resolver(interaction)
```

Once `ResolutionResult.UNCHANGED` is returned, the DSL tree is considered **fully resolved** and can be passed to the evaluator for execution.

> ⚠️ **Note:** Even a fully resolved DSL tree may still raise exceptions during tool execution.
> These are handled by the `Evaluator`, which wraps failed intents in recovery nodes (`IntentRuntimeErrorResolver`) to enable retry or replanning.

---

## 🧮 Evaluator

The **evaluator** executes a fully resolved DSL tree using **depth-first traversal**. Its purpose is to invoke real Python tools, nest return values in composed expressions, and update the tree with evaluation outcomes.

Each successfully evaluated `Intent` node is replaced with an `IntentEvaluatedSuccess` node that captures the **return value** of the tool call. This makes the evaluation **idempotent**: subsequent evaluations of the same DSL skip already-executed branches.

If a tool raises an exception that is recoverable, the evaluator replaces the failed intent with an `IntentRuntimeErrorResolver` node. This enables interactive **runtime error recovery**: the resolver resumes resolution, explains the issue to the user, and prompts them to adapt their intent.  
If the user can revise their request (e.g., choose a different screw size), the system will retry with an updated DSL. Otherwise, if no viable alternative exists, the user can choose to abort.

```python
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.runtime.evaluator import Evaluator

evaluator = Evaluator(runtime, resolver.dsl_elements)
result = evaluator.evaluate()
print(result.status, result.value)
```

For asynchronous toolchains, use `AsyncEvaluator` which mirrors the same depth-first traversal but awaits each node's `eval_async` method:

```python
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.runtime.async_evaluator import AsyncEvaluator

async_evaluator = AsyncEvaluator(runtime, resolver.dsl_elements)
result = await async_evaluator.evaluate()
```

Evaluation proceeds until:

- all intents are successfully executed, returning `EvaluationStatus.SUCCESS`, or
- an unrecoverable error halts execution, returning `EvaluationStatus.ABORTED_UNRECOVERABLE`, or
- a recoverable error is wrapped for retry, returning `EvaluationStatus.ABORTED_RECOVERABLE`.

## 🧰 Runtime Context

`LLMRuntimeContext` defines the external resources available to the DSL engine during
resolution and evaluation:

- **Tool handlers** are Python functions decorated with `@tool_handler`. These functions serve 
  as callable tools in Python and are invoked as intents within the DSL.

- **Query sources** are optional Python functions decorated with `@tool_query_source`. They are 
  used by `QUERY_FILL`, `QUERY_GATHER`, and `QUERY_USER` to infer slot values from structured
  runtime data. These can include LLM completions, search tools, or structured data sources, 
  such as a screw inventory for a robot arm. Each query source must return structured YAML, 
  which is injected into system prompts and used by the resolver to fill in missing values.

The context also maintains intermediate state (e.g., call stack, prior interactions),
allowing resolution to pause and resume across asynchronous user interactions.

```python
from fifo_dev_common.introspection.tool_decorator import tool_handler, tool_query_source
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.runtime import LLMRuntimeContext

class Robot:
    @tool_handler("retrieve_screw")
    def retrieve_screw(self, count: int, length: int):
        """
        Retrieve screws of a specific length from the inventory.

        Args:
            count (int):
                Number of screws to retrieve.

            length (int):
                Length of the screws to retrieve.
        """
        ...

    @tool_query_source("inventory")
    def get_inventory(self) -> str:
        """
        Returns the inventory of screws, including their length and count.

        Useful to answer user queries about screw specifications or quantities,
        such as to resolve 'all' when the user asks for 'give me all screws'.

        Returns:
            str:
                The serialized inventory.
        """
        return ...

robot = Robot()
runtime = LLMRuntimeContext(
    # Tool handlers
    tools=[
        robot.retrieve_screw
    ],
    # Query sources
    query_sources=[
        robot.get_inventory
    ]
)
```

## 🤖 LLM Invocation Strategy

### LLM Invocation Pathways

`dia` uses **two types of model calls**, depending on the resolution phase:

- 🧠 **Base model (no adapter)**: used for open-ended reasoning over structured runtime context 
  (via `query_sources`).
- 🧩 **LoRA adapter**: used to convert user input or reasoning outputs into structured DSL nodes.

When resolving `QUERY_FILL`, `QUERY_USER`, or `QUERY_GATHER`, the **content** of query sources (when available) is passed to the **base model**, not the fine-tuned LoRA adapter. This design allows the base model to reason over dynamic runtime information, such as a screw inventory, task list, or sensor feed. The objective is to produce a **natural-language answer**, not a DSL expression.

LoRA adapters are fine-tuned for converting natural-language text into **structured DSL syntax**, not for reasoning over external sources. They do not extend the base model's ability to interpret structured data or perform inference.

This separation ensures that dynamic context is handled by the model best suited for understanding it, while DSL construction remains the responsibility of the adapter, which is fine-tuned specifically for generating DSL syntax.

While generating its answer, the base model is prompted to generate an **explanation** based on the available sources, followed by a **user-facing answer** grounded in that explanation. This ordering improves transparency and ensures the result is anchored in the actual data.

Once the answer is available, it is passed to a LoRA adapter, which converts it into a structured DSL expression.

This separation between **reasoning (base model)** and **DSL generation (adapter)** helps keep the system modular, transparent, and easier to apply across domains.

### Resolution Phases and LLM Responsibilities

| Phase                          | Interactive? | Model Used        | Purpose                                                                                  | System Prompt(s)                                 |
|-------------------------------|--------------|-------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| `QueryFill`                   | No           | Base              | Compute a value directly from query sources                                         | `system_prompt_query_fill`                       |
| `QueryUser`                   | Yes          | Base → Adapter    | **Base**: generate an answer from query sources<br>**Interaction**: user reviews the answer and responds<br>**Adapter**: convert user response into DSL | `system_prompt_query_user` → `system_prompt_intent_sequencer` or `system_prompt_slot_resolver` |
| `QueryGather`                 | No           | Base → Adapter    | **Base**: gather information from query sources<br>**Adapter**: generate DSL using original prompt + gathered info | `system_prompt_query_gather` → `system_prompt_intent_sequencer` |
| `Ask`                         | Yes          | Adapter           | **Interaction**: prompt the user for a missing slot<br>**Adapter**: turn reply into DSL  | `system_prompt_slot_resolver`                    |
| `IntentRuntimeErrorResolver` | Yes          | Adapter           | **Interaction**: display runtime error and ask how to proceed<br>**Adapter**: generate updated DSL from user input | `system_prompt_error_resolver`                   |
| `resolver._process_user_prompt()` | No       | Adapter           | Convert the initial user prompt into DSL                                                 | `system_prompt_intent_sequencer`                |

## 🚀 End‑to‑End Execution

### 🦾 Robotic Arm Framework

This example demonstrates how `dia` integrates with a robotic arm framework to interpret natural language
commands, resolve missing information, and handle runtime errors through user interaction.

🧪 [View and run the demo](demo/robot_arm.py)

**Key features demonstrated**:
- Slot resolution using `ASK(...)` and runtime query sources
- Runtime tool execution through intent evaluation
- Error recovery using `IntentRuntimeErrorResolver`

📺 Watch the video below for a live example:  
[![Demo Video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/wbdLcn9Wizc/hqdefault.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wbdLcn9Wizc)

### 🧩 Mini Calculator

This example demonstrates how `dia` supports **nested intent execution**, where the result of one tool is fed into another using `ReturnValue` nodes.

🧪 [View and run the demo](demo/calculator.py)

Key features demonstrated:
- Nested intent evaluation  
- Intent composition via `ReturnValue`  
- Runtime tool execution with correct evaluation order

---

## ✅ License

MIT — see [LICENSE](../../LICENSE).

Commit message:

doc(READMEs): add "Project Status & Audience"

fifo_dev_dsl/dia/README.md, after:

# `fifo_dev_dsl.dia` Module

**DIA** (DSL for Interactive Agents) is a domain-specific language and runtime for translating
user intents and queries into tool invocations and context-aware logic. It powers goal-driven
agents that can resolve missing information, recover from runtime errors, and complete complex tasks
through interactive dialogue.

The DSL is composed of five categories of nodes:

- **Intent execution**: represents structured tool calls with named parameters. Includes success and error wrappers to support recovery.
- **Slot resolution**: handles missing values through user interaction or LLM-powered queries (`ASK`, `QueryFill`, `QueryGather`, `QueryUser`).
- **Control flow**: enables aborting, redirecting, or replacing execution paths (`Abort`, `AbortWithNewDsl`).
- **Value representation**: supports concrete values (`Value`), fuzzy values (`FuzzyValue`), return values from nested intents (`ReturnValue`), and references to previous slot values (`SameAsPreviousIntent`).
- **Containers**: used to group and propagate DSL elements, including `Slot`, `ListElement`, and `PropagateSlots`.

Each node is implemented as a Python class under [`dsl/elements`](dsl/elements), with detailed 
documentation available in [`dsl/elements/README.md`](dsl/elements/README.md).

This document provides a high-level overview of the `dia` package, including how DSL trees are generated,
parsed, resolved, evaluated, and integrated into interactive agent workflows.

## 📚 Table of Contents

- 🎯 [Project Status & Audience](#-project-status--audience)
- 🔁 [High-Level Flow Example](#-high-level-flow-example)
- 🧾 [Parsing DSL](#-parsing-dsl)
- 🧭 [Resolver](#-resolver)
- 🧮 [Evaluator](#-evaluator)
- 🧰 [Runtime Context](#-runtime-context)
- 🤖 [LLM Invocation Strategy](#-llm-invocation-strategy)
- 🚀 [End‑to‑End Execution](#-endtoend-execution)
- ✅ [License](#-license)

---

## 🎯 Project Status & Audience

🚧 **Work in Progress** — Part of the **`fifo-dev-dsl`** project, currently in **early development**. 🚧

This is a personal project developed and maintained by a solo developer.  
Contributions, ideas, and feedback are welcome, but development is driven by personal time and priorities.

`fifo-dev-dsl` is designed to support other `fifo-*` projects developed by the author.  
It is provided for **individual developers** interested in experimenting with DSL-driven natural language interpretation.

No official release or pre-release has been published yet. The code is provided for **preview and experimentation**.  
**Use at your own risk.**

---

## 🔁 High-Level Flow Example

In the rest of the documentation, we will use the following example to illustrate DIA's ability to parse, resolve, and execute high-level intents.

Suppose a user says:  
_"Retrieve 3 screws from the inventory"_

DIA processes this in four stages:

1. **Transform user input into DIA DSL**  
   Converts the user's request into:  
   `retrieve_screw(count=3, length=ASK("What screw length do you need?"))`  
   This step uses the definitions of callable tools and the declared presence of runtime sources (such as a screw inventory) to generate the DSL expression and determine how to resolve missing information. At this stage, the model is only aware of the existence and purpose of each source, not their contents.

2. **Parse DSL syntax into DSL tree**  
   Parses the DSL string into a structured tree of DSL nodes.

3. **Resolve missing information**  
   Detects the unresolved `length` slot, prompts the user for clarification, and receives the reply `"12"`.

4. **Evaluate resolved DSL tree**  
   The tree is now complete:  
   `retrieve_screw(count=3, length=12)`  
   The system then executes the tool implementation for `retrieve_screw`, performing the real-world action.

---

## 🧾 Parsing DSL

The DIA parser converts a DSL expression, either handcrafted or generated by an LLM, into a tree of
`DslBase` nodes. This tree serves as the structured representation of the user's intent and is
processed by the resolver and evaluator in later stages.

The tree can be parsed using:

```python
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.dsl.parser import parse_dsl

root = parse_dsl('retrieve_screw(count=3, length=ASK("What screw length do you need?"))')

root.pretty_print_dsl()
```

In LLM-driven workflows, the DSL string is typically produced by an intent sequencer model (such as a fine-tuned LoRA adapter), which translates natural language prompts into structured expressions ready for parsing.

---

## 🧭 Resolver

The resolver performs a **stack-based traversal** of the DSL tree. It pauses when required values are missing and resumes after each interaction, enabling stepwise, multi-turn reasoning.

It walks the structure and resolves missing values using several mechanisms:

- `ASK` prompts the user for clarification.
- `QUERY_FILL`, `QUERY_USER`, and `QUERY_GATHER` query external sources via the `LLMRuntimeContext`.
- `PROPAGATE_SLOT` forwards values provided in the last interaction.
- `ABORT` and `ABORT_WITH_NEW_INTENTS` can replace parts of the tree.

Resolution is resumable. After each interaction request, the call stack is stored in the `ResolutionContext`, allowing resolution to continue once the user has responded.

This design is **asynchronous-friendly**: the resolver does not block or wait for input inside its internal loop. Instead, it exits cleanly after emitting an interaction request, allowing external systems (e.g., UI or message handlers) to collect input and resume resolution later.

```python
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.resolution.resolver import Resolver
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.resolution.enums import ResolutionResult
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.resolution.interaction import Interaction, InteractionAnswer
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.runtime.context import LLMRuntimeContext

runtime = LLMRuntimeContext(tools=[...], query_sources=[...])
resolver = Resolver(runtime_context=runtime, prompt="retrieve 3 screws from the inventory")

outcome = resolver(interaction_reply=None)
if outcome.result is ResolutionResult.INTERACTION_REQUESTED:
    print(outcome.interaction.message)  
    # Output: "What length do you need?"
    
    # Pass the user answer back into the resolver
    interaction = Interaction(outcome.interaction, InteractionAnswer("12"))
    outcome = resolver(interaction)
```

Once `ResolutionResult.UNCHANGED` is returned, the DSL tree is considered **fully resolved** and can be passed to the evaluator for execution.

> ⚠️ **Note:** Even a fully resolved DSL tree may still raise exceptions during tool execution.
> These are handled by the `Evaluator`, which wraps failed intents in recovery nodes (`IntentRuntimeErrorResolver`) to enable retry or replanning.

---

## 🧮 Evaluator

The **evaluator** executes a fully resolved DSL tree using **depth-first traversal**. Its purpose is to invoke real Python tools, nest return values in composed expressions, and update the tree with evaluation outcomes.

Each successfully evaluated `Intent` node is replaced with an `IntentEvaluatedSuccess` node that captures the **return value** of the tool call. This makes the evaluation **idempotent**: subsequent evaluations of the same DSL skip already-executed branches.

If a tool raises an exception that is recoverable, the evaluator replaces the failed intent with an `IntentRuntimeErrorResolver` node. This enables interactive **runtime error recovery**: the resolver resumes resolution, explains the issue to the user, and prompts them to adapt their intent.  
If the user can revise their request (e.g., choose a different screw size), the system will retry with an updated DSL. Otherwise, if no viable alternative exists, the user can choose to abort.

```python
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.runtime.evaluator import Evaluator

evaluator = Evaluator(runtime, resolver.dsl_elements)
result = evaluator.evaluate()
print(result.status, result.value)
```

For asynchronous toolchains, use `AsyncEvaluator` which mirrors the same depth-first traversal but awaits each node's `eval_async` method:

```python
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.runtime.async_evaluator import AsyncEvaluator

async_evaluator = AsyncEvaluator(runtime, resolver.dsl_elements)
result = await async_evaluator.evaluate()
```

Evaluation proceeds until:

- all intents are successfully executed, returning `EvaluationStatus.SUCCESS`, or
- an unrecoverable error halts execution, returning `EvaluationStatus.ABORTED_UNRECOVERABLE`, or
- a recoverable error is wrapped for retry, returning `EvaluationStatus.ABORTED_RECOVERABLE`.

## 🧰 Runtime Context

`LLMRuntimeContext` defines the external resources available to the DSL engine during
resolution and evaluation:

- **Tool handlers** are Python functions decorated with `@tool_handler`. These functions serve 
  as callable tools in Python and are invoked as intents within the DSL.

- **Query sources** are optional Python functions decorated with `@tool_query_source`. They are 
  used by `QUERY_FILL`, `QUERY_GATHER`, and `QUERY_USER` to infer slot values from structured
  runtime data. These can include LLM completions, search tools, or structured data sources, 
  such as a screw inventory for a robot arm. Each query source must return structured YAML, 
  which is injected into system prompts and used by the resolver to fill in missing values.

The context also maintains intermediate state (e.g., call stack, prior interactions),
allowing resolution to pause and resume across asynchronous user interactions.

```python
from fifo_dev_common.introspection.tool_decorator import tool_handler, tool_query_source
from fifo_dev_dsl.dia.runtime import LLMRuntimeContext

class Robot:
    @tool_handler("retrieve_screw")
    def retrieve_screw(self, count: int, length: int):
        """
        Retrieve screws of a specific length from the inventory.

        Args:
            count (int):
                Number of screws to retrieve.

            length (int):
                Length of the screws to retrieve.
        """
        ...

    @tool_query_source("inventory")
    def get_inventory(self) -> str:
        """
        Returns the inventory of screws, including their length and count.

        Useful to answer user queries about screw specifications or quantities,
        such as to resolve 'all' when the user asks for 'give me all screws'.

        Returns:
            str:
                The serialized inventory.
        """
        return ...

robot = Robot()
runtime = LLMRuntimeContext(
    # Tool handlers
    tools=[
        robot.retrieve_screw
    ],
    # Query sources
    query_sources=[
        robot.get_inventory
    ]
)
```

## 🤖 LLM Invocation Strategy

### LLM Invocation Pathways

`dia` uses **two types of model calls**, depending on the resolution phase:

- 🧠 **Base model (no adapter)**: used for open-ended reasoning over structured runtime context 
  (via `query_sources`).
- 🧩 **LoRA adapter**: used to convert user input or reasoning outputs into structured DSL nodes.

When resolving `QUERY_FILL`, `QUERY_USER`, or `QUERY_GATHER`, the **content** of query sources (when available) is passed to the **base model**, not the fine-tuned LoRA adapter. This design allows the base model to reason over dynamic runtime information, such as a screw inventory, task list, or sensor feed. The objective is to produce a **natural-language answer**, not a DSL expression.

LoRA adapters are fine-tuned for converting natural-language text into **structured DSL syntax**, not for reasoning over external sources. They do not extend the base model's ability to interpret structured data or perform inference.

This separation ensures that dynamic context is handled by the model best suited for understanding it, while DSL construction remains the responsibility of the adapter, which is fine-tuned specifically for generating DSL syntax.

While generating its answer, the base model is prompted to generate an **explanation** based on the available sources, followed by a **user-facing answer** grounded in that explanation. This ordering improves transparency and ensures the result is anchored in the actual data.

Once the answer is available, it is passed to a LoRA adapter, which converts it into a structured DSL expression.

This separation between **reasoning (base model)** and **DSL generation (adapter)** helps keep the system modular, transparent, and easier to apply across domains.

### Resolution Phases and LLM Responsibilities

| Phase                          | Interactive? | Model Used        | Purpose                                                                                  | System Prompt(s)                                 |
|-------------------------------|--------------|-------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| `QueryFill`                   | No           | Base              | Compute a value directly from query sources                                         | `system_prompt_query_fill`                       |
| `QueryUser`                   | Yes          | Base → Adapter    | **Base**: generate an answer from query sources<br>**Interaction**: user reviews the answer and responds<br>**Adapter**: convert user response into DSL | `system_prompt_query_user` → `system_prompt_intent_sequencer` or `system_prompt_slot_resolver` |
| `QueryGather`                 | No           | Base → Adapter    | **Base**: gather information from query sources<br>**Adapter**: generate DSL using original prompt + gathered info | `system_prompt_query_gather` → `system_prompt_intent_sequencer` |
| `Ask`                         | Yes          | Adapter           | **Interaction**: prompt the user for a missing slot<br>**Adapter**: turn reply into DSL  | `system_prompt_slot_resolver`                    |
| `IntentRuntimeErrorResolver` | Yes          | Adapter           | **Interaction**: display runtime error and ask how to proceed<br>**Adapter**: generate updated DSL from user input | `system_prompt_error_resolver`                   |
| `resolver._process_user_prompt()` | No       | Adapter           | Convert the initial user prompt into DSL                                                 | `system_prompt_intent_sequencer`                |

## 🚀 End‑to‑End Execution

### 🦾 Robotic Arm Framework

This example demonstrates how `dia` integrates with a robotic arm framework to interpret natural language
commands, resolve missing information, and handle runtime errors through user interaction.

🧪 [View and run the demo](demo/robot_arm.py)

**Key features demonstrated**:
- Slot resolution using `ASK(...)` and runtime query sources
- Runtime tool execution through intent evaluation
- Error recovery using `IntentRuntimeErrorResolver`

📺 Watch the video below for a live example:  
[![Demo Video](https://img.youtube.com/vi/wbdLcn9Wizc/hqdefault.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wbdLcn9Wizc)

### 🧩 Mini Calculator

This example demonstrates how `dia` supports **nested intent execution**, where the result of one tool is fed into another using `ReturnValue` nodes.

🧪 [View and run the demo](demo/calculator.py)

Key features demonstrated:
- Nested intent evaluation  
- Intent composition via `ReturnValue`  
- Runtime tool execution with correct evaluation order

---

## ✅ License

MIT — see [LICENSE](../../LICENSE).
